OpenXC Shift Knob
=================

**ABOUT:** The Haptic Feedback Shift Knob is a manual transmission shift knob capable of sending haptic and 
visual signals to the driver. Using a built in algorithm, the Shift Knob determines when the driver 
should shift for best performance and then sends an appropriate haptic pulse through the driver's 
hand signalling that he or she should shift. 

The Shift Knob hardware is based on the [Arduino][] platform and toolkit. In order to easily use these tools,
the Shift Knob firmware runs on top of the Arduino bootloader. 

For more details on the complete project, visit the [OpenXC Shift Knob]
(http://openxcplatform.com/projects/shift-knob.html) webpage.

## Shift Knob Firmware

This program reads in a JSON stream at a baud rate of `115200` and controls the following 3 components accordingly:

1. Haptic Feedback Motor
1. 7 Segment Display
1. RGB LEDs

A 74hc595 shift register is used to control the 7-sement display and requires 3 inputs: 
2 latch pins and 1 data pin. See this [tutorial](http://arduino.cc/en/Tutorial/ShiftOut) to learn
more about shift registers.

RGB LEDs are controlled with 3 PWM pins and the Haptic feedback motor is controlled with another PWM pin. 

There is also a PWM pin connection for controlling the brightness of the 7 segment display, 
but this functionality has not yet been implemented.

## Haptic Feedback Motor Control

The Shift Knob firmware has various parameters to control the haptic feel of the shift knob. There are 3 
parameters that affect the shift knob vibration profile: 

* `motorOn` - The amount of time in milliseconds that the motor will vibrate during a singular pulse
* `motorOff` - The amount of time in milliseconds between vibration pulses
* `motorCount` and `motorPulse` - The number of pulses during a given haptic signal sent to the driver. 
The `motorCount` is used to store number of pulses during a given signal and `motorPulse` is used to track
the current motor pulse until the shift knob has reached the `motorCount`.

The timing of the pulses and the number of pulses is constantly being checked in the main `loop()`. Future
implementations could include instricate haptic profiles such as a sinusoidal or sawtooth waveform.

## RGB Values

Rather than send individual red, blue, and green values to the shift knob, the host device sends 1 value
between 0 and 255. This value is then mapped such that at any given time, two of the colors are being combined
at some given ratio. A value of 0 is equal to 100% red whereas, a value of 85 is 100% green, and a value of 170 
is 100% blue. Once the value reaches 255, it is back to 100% red. Anywhere in between is a mixture. For example,
a value between 0 and 85 is some porportional mixture of red and green. 

Future implementations can also control the intensity of the RGB values to increase or decrease the brightness.

## Supported JSON Messages

	{"name": "shift", "value": 1}  
	
	* value is either 1 or 0. acting as a boolean.
	
	{"name": "color", "value": 100}   
	
	* value is an integer 0 to 255
	
	{"name": "gear", "value": 1}      
	
	* value is 0 to 9

## Pin Assignments:

Note: the pin numbers used below are the [Arduino][] equivalent pins. They are not the actual pin numbers 
from the Atmega328 datasheet. 
Haptic Feedback Motor (PWM control):

* int motorPin = 5

8-bit shift register:

* int latchPin = 7
* int clockPin = 8
* int dataPin = 4

7 segment brightness control (PWM control):

* int digitLED = 6

RGB LEDs (PWM control):

* int redLED = 9
* int blueLED = 10
* int greenLED = 11

Input button: 

* int buttonPin = 2;

## Dependencies

In addition to the [Arduino][] developer environment, this project also requires [aJson][] to parse the 
incoming JSON stream. Download the [aJson] repository and copy it to your local `examples` folder for
your Arduino environment.

## Resources

This repository is one of 4 repositories listed below:

**3D Design** - The [shiftknob-3Ddesign](http://github.com/openxc/shiftknob-3Ddesign) 
repository contains .STL and STEP files for the 3D printable shift knob housings as well as documentation
for creating your own physical shift knob design that works with the PCBs already designed.

**Hardware** - The [shiftknob-hardware](http://github.com/openxc/shiftknob-hardware) 
repository contains Eagle schematics and PCB layouts for the shift knob embedded hardware.

**Firmware** - The [shiftknob-firmware](http://github.com/openxc/shiftknob-firmware) 
repository contains Arduino source code to run on the embedded system as well as other firmware 
versions for differing applications. 

**Android** - The [shiftknob-android](http://github.com/openxc/shiftknob-android) 
repository contains the Android application to run on the OpenXC host device. This app sends the
appropriate signals to the Shift Knob embedded system.

### License

The Android and firmware source code is available under the BSD open source
license.

The hardware schematics and enclosure design are available under the TAPR Open
Hardware License.

[aJson]: http://github.com/interactive-matter/aJson
[Arduino]: http://arduino.cc
